Announcer: COMING UP ON
''SECRETS OF THE DEAD,''
CAPTURED SLAVES MUTINY AND RISK
THEIR LIVES FOR FREEDOM...
Man: THE SLAVES PLANNED
FOR A LONG TIME TO BECOME
MASTERS OF THE SHIP.
OUR AIM WAS TO GO BACK
TO OUR OWN COUNTRY.
Announcer: BUT THE SLAVE
TRADERS ARE DETERMINED
TO SAVE THEIR SHIP.
Man: HE IS TRYING TO OUTWIT
THE SLAVES AT THEIR OWN GAME.
IF YOU WROTE THIS UP IN A
NOVEL, NOBODY WOULD BELIEVE IT.
Announcer: THE STORY OF
AFRICA'S FIRST FREEDOM FIGHTER.
FOR ME, HE'S AMONGST THE
HEROES OF ALL HEROES.
''SLAVE SHIP MUTINY'' ON
''SECRETS OF THE DEAD.
Announcer: ''SECRETS OF THE
DEAD'' WAS MADE POSSIBLE
BY CONTRIBUTIONS TO YOUR PBS
STATION FROM VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
THANK YOU.
Narrator: HIDDEN IN
THESE TATTERED BOOKS
IS A STORY ABOUT ONE
MAN'S FIGHT FOR FREEDOM.
HIS BATTLE TOOK PLACE
NEARLY 250 YEARS AGO
ON A SLAVE SHIP BOUND FOR
CAPE TOWN, SOUTH AFRICA.
A FREE MAN NAMED MASSAVANNA,
ENSLAVED THROUGH DECEPTION
AND DETERMINED TO RETURN
TO HIS HOME ANY WAY HE CAN,
SEIZES A NOTORIOUS
DUTCH SLAVE SHIP.
ON-BOARD, A LIFE-AND-DEATH
STRUGGLE BETWEEN SLAVES AND
SAILORS TAKES PLACE.
THERE CAN ONLY BE ONE VICTOR.
TODAY, THE SHIP
LIES BURIED UNDER THESE
WAVES AT CAPE AGULHAS,
THE SOUTHERNMOST TIP OF AFRICA.
THIS SLAVE SHIP MUTINY HAS
BEEN LARGELY FORGOTTEN.
BUT NOW, 3 PEOPLE
ARE UNCOVERING THESE
REMARKABLE EVENTS
AND LEARNING THE
STORY OF MASSAVANNA,
THE MAN NOW BEING HAILED
AS ONE OF SOUTH AFRICA'S
FIRST FREEDOM FIGHTERS.
PROFESSOR NIGEL WORDEN
STUDIES THE HISTORY OF
CAPE TOWN UNDER DUTCH RULE
AND IS RESEARCHING HOW AND
WHY THE REBELLION HAPPENED;
SLAVE DESCENDANT LUCY CAMPBELL
WANTS TO KNOW WHO CAPE TOWN
SLAVE ANCESTORS WERE
AND HOW THEY STRUGGLED
FOR THEIR FREEDOM;
AND MARINE ARCHAEOLOGIST
JACO BOSHOFF
IS HUNTING FOR THE
REMAINS OF THE SLAVE SHIP
AT THE HEART OF THIS STORY.
IT WAS CALLED THE MEERMIN.
IT SAILED FROM MADAGASCAR
IN JANUARY 1 766
WITH MORE THAN 1 40
ENSLAVED PEOPLE ABOARD.
THIS WOULD BE ITS FINAL VO YAGE.
TODAY, CAPE TOWN, SOUTH
AFRICA, IS A THRIVING CITY
WHOSE RESIDENTS CAN
TRACE THEIR ANCESTRY BACK
TO FAR-FLUNG COUNTRIES ALL
AROUND THE INDIAN OCEAN.
HOWEVER, MOST RESIDENTS HAVE
ANCESTORS WHO WERE BROUGHT TO
THE CAPE AGAINST THEIR WILL,
AS SLAVES.
CAPE TOWN WAS FOUNDED IN
1652 TO SUPPLY FOOD AND WATER
FOR THE MERCHANT SHIPS OF THE
DUTCH EAST INDIA COMPANY,
ALSO KNOWN AS THE VOC.
IT WAS A COMPANY TOWN,
AND THE VOC WANTED
TO KEEP IT THAT WAY.
COMMERCE WAS KING.
Man: THE V.O.C. WAS
A COMMERCIAL COMPANY, BUT
IT WAS ALSO A GOVERNMENT.
IT WAS A STATE WITHIN
A STATE, IF YOU LIKE.
IT HAD BEEN GIVEN THE AUTHORITY
BY THE STATE'S GENERAL IN THE
NETHERLANDS TO RULE--
TO RUN LAW, TO MAKE
TREATIES, TO DECLARE WARS--
AS WELL AS TO TRADE,
SO IT WAS MUCH MORE THAN
JUST A TRADING COMPANY.
IN THE CAPE, IT HAD TOTAL
POWER. IT WAS THE STATE,
AND IT HAD THE RIGHT OF LIFE
AND DEATH OVER ALL OF THE
INHABITANTS OF THE COLONY.
Narrator: THE HISTORIC DOCUMENTS
OF THE VOC ARE HELD IN CAPE
TOWN'S PROVINCIAL ARCHIVES.
HERE, 30 MILES OF DOCUMENTS
HOLD THE SECRETS OF LIFE IN
CAPE TOWN'S SLAVE SOCIETY
AND WHY THE MEERMIN WAS
BRINGING SLAVES HERE.
THEY DID NOT WANT A SETTLER
COLONY HERE AT THE CAPE.
THEY DIDN'T WANT LOTS OF
IMMIGRANTS COMING IN.
THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN
EXPENSIVE FOR THEM.
THEY DIDN'T WANT PEOPLE
TO ESTABLISH THEMSELVES
AS INDEPENDENT FARMERS,
AND INSTEAD, THEREFORE, OF
ENCOURAGING IMMIGRANTS,
THEY TURNED TO SLAVE LABOR.
Narrator: THE VOC
BROUGHT 63,000 PEOPLE
TO CAPE TOWN AS SLAVES,
BEGINNING IN 1658.
THEY CAME FROM ALL
AROUND THE INDIAN OCEAN,
FROM EASTERN AFRICA THROUGH
INDIA TO INDONESIA.
SLAVERY CONTINUED UNTIL 1838.
UNTIL THEN, AS
CAPE TOWN EXPANDED,
ITS FREE CITIZENS PURCHASED
SLAVES FOR DOMESTIC LABOR.
CAPE TOWN BECAME
A SLAVE SOCIETY.
NOW, THEIR DESCENDANTS
WANT TO KNOW THEIR HISTORY,
NONE MORE SO THAN HERITAGE
ACTIVIST LUCY CAMPBELL.
Campbell: WHEN SLAVES
CAME TO THE CAPE, THEIR
NAMES WERE CHANGED.
IF IT WAS A NAME LIKE
SANGORA OR MASSAVANNA
AND THEY ARRIVED IN CAPE
TOWN, SAY, ON FEBRUARY 15
OR SEPTEMBER, THEY WOULD
HAVE BEEN NAMED SEPTEMBER--
THE MONTH WHEN THEY ARRIVED.
JUST LIKE TO INDICATE TO
YOU, THERE IS SEPTEMBER.
LOOK AT ALL THESE NAMES.
THOUSANDS OF THEM,
THOUSANDS OF THEM.
LOOK AT ALL THE
FEBRUARYS YOU SEE HERE.
ALL THESE ARE NAMES OF SLAVES
THAT WERE BROUGHT TO THE CAPE.
A LOT OF THE PEOPLE
IN CAPE TOWN--I WOULD
SAY EVEN THE MAJORITY
OF THE PEOPLE IN CAPE TOWN--
ARE SLAVE DESCENDANTS,
WHETHER THEY ARE WHITE,
WHETHER THEY ARE BLACK,
OR WHETHER THEY ARE
SO-CALLED COLORED.
Narrator: BY 1 766,
CAPE TOWN HAD GROWN INTO
A SIZABLE SETTLEMENT,
WITH MORE THAN 7,000
INHABITANTS--2/3
OF THEM SLAVES.
KEEPING SO MANY PEOPLE UNDER
CONTROL REQUIRED CONSTANT
SUPERVISION AND COERCION.
EVEN THE ARCHITECTURE OF A
TYPICAL CAPE TOWN HOUSE WAS
DESIGNED TO CONTROL SLAVES.
THIS IS KOOPMANS-DE WET HOUSE.
NOW A MUSEUM, IT ONCE HOUSED
A FAMILY OF 13 EUROPEANS,
THE DE WET FAMILY,
AND THEIR 26 SLAVES.
THIS HOUSE WOULD HAVE BEEN A
HOUSE OF A VERY WEALTHY OWNER
THAT WOULD HAVE HAD SLAVES,
AND THE HOUSE WAS BUILT
SPECIFICALLY AROUND SLAVES,
BECAUSE WITHOUT SLAVES,
THEY COULDN'T FUNCTION, THEY
COULDN'T FUNCTION AT ALL.
SO THIS WOULD HAVE
BEEN THE CENTER
OR THE DOMAIN OF THE
MISTRESS OF THE HOUSE.
THE MISTRESS OF THE HOUSE COULD
WATCH OVER THE SLAVES OUTSIDE
AND SHE COULD WATCH
SLAVES COMING UP AND
DOWN FROM THE STEPS.
THIS WOULD HAVE BEEN
ALMOST LIKE A WEB,
AND SHE WOULD HAVE
BEEN IN THE CENTER.
THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN AN
EYE ON THEM AT ALL TIMES.
WHATEVER THEY DID, THERE
WAS AN EYE ON THEM,
AND THE WEIRD THING IS, IS THAT
THERE WAS NOT PHYSICAL CONTROL,
BUT THERE WAS A
PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTROL
WHERE THE MASTER OR
THE MISTRESS DIDN'T HAVE
TO USE PHYSICAL ABUSE,
BUT THE MENTAL SLAVERY IS
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL SLAVERY.
A SLAVE WAS AT THE MERCY
OF THE MASTER AT ALL TIMES.
A MASTER COULD ASK
ANYTHING OF THAT SLAVE:
BRUSH MY SHOES,
PUT ON MY SHIRT,
CARRY THIS, CARRY THAT,
COME LAY WITH ME.
THEY COULD BASICALLY
ASK FOR ANYTHING
BECAUSE THE MASTER
OWNED THAT SLAVE.
THAT SLAVE WAS A COMMODITY.
Narrator: THE SLAVE SHIP MEERMIN
TRANSPORTED THIS COMMODITY.
ITS SAILORS WOULD GIVE
THEIR TRIBAL KINGS
GUNS AND GUNPOWDER IN
EXCHANGE FOR PEOPLE.
ON JANUARY 20, 1 766,
THE SHIP SET SAIL FROM BETSIBOKA
BAY IN WESTERN MADAGASCAR.
ITS HEADING IS FOR CAPE TOWN.
3 CREW MEMBERS WILL
PLAY CRITICAL ROLES
IN WHAT IS ABOUT TO HAPPEN.
GERRIT MULLER IS
THE SHIP'S CAPTAIN.
THIS IS HIS FIRST TIME
RUNNING A SLAVE SHIP.
CHIEF MERCHANT JOHAN
CRAUSE IS IN CHARGE OF
THE VOC's CARGO OF SLAVES.
CRAUSE HAS BEEN ON SLAVE
JOURNEYS TO MADAGASCAR BEFORE,
AND SO HAS HIS
ASSISTANT, OLAF LEIJ.
Worden: THE MEERMIN
STORY IS INDEED ONE
OF THE MOST REMARKABLE
OF THE WHOLE OF THE PERIOD
OF SLAVERY AT THE CAPE,
ALTHOUGH IT'S RELATIVELY
LITTLE KNOWN ABOUT IN--BOTH
IN SOUTH AFRICA OR OUTSIDE IT.
BUT WHAT IS PARTICULARLY
EXTRAORDINARY
IS THAT WE HAVE RECORDS OF THAT.
WE HAVE THE VERY WORDS OF THE
PEOPLE WHO PARTICIPATED IN THAT.
THE DUTCH EAST INDIA
COMPANY WAS AN INCREDIBLY
BUREAUCRATIC ORGANIZATION,
AND IT MUST HAVE BEEN
HELL TO WORK FOR.
IT RECORDED EVERYTHING.
Narrator: THESE WORDS WERE
RECORDED WHEN THE SURVIVORS
OF THE MEERMIN SHIPWRECK
WERE BROUGHT TO CAPE TOWN
AND QUESTIONED BY THE VOC's
VERY OWN COURT OF JUSTICE.
ONE THING WE KNOW IS THAT
MULLER WAS ONLY RECENTLY
APPOINTED AS A CAPTAIN.
HE HADN'T HAD MUCH EXPERIENCE
OF BEING ON A SLAVE SHIP,
WHEREAS CRAUSE HAD, AND ALL
THE WAY THROUGH THE RECORDS,
WE SEE CRAUSE REMINDING
MULLER-- WHO IS,
IN FACT, HIS SUPERIOR--
THAT ACTUALLY HE KNOWS A
LOT MORE ABOUT HOW TO SAIL A
SLAVE SHIP THAN MULLER DOES.
SO MULLER'S AUTHORITY IS BEING
RATHER UNDERMINED BY CRAUSE,
THIS YOUNGER MAN, BUT
NONETHELESS A MAN WHO HAS
MORE EXPERIENCE AT THIS.
Narrator: THIS STRUGGLE
OVER LEADERSHIP WILL
COMPROMISE THE DUTCH CREW.
[SHIP CREAKS]
THE VOC PREFERRED TO IMPORT
CHILDREN TO WORK IN CAPE TOWN.
THEY SURVIVED THE VO YAGES
BETTER THAN THE ADULTS
AND WOULD PROVIDE MORE LABOR
OVER THE COURSE OF THEIR LIVES.
THE AVERAGE AGE OF
AN IMPORTED SLAVE
WAS JUST 16.
THE TRUE FACE OF SLAVERY
CAN BE SEEN IN
PHOTOS OF CHILDREN
TAKEN FROM MADAGASCAR IN 1868.
THE CHILDREN WERE RESCUED
WHEN A BRITISH NAVAL VESSEL
INTERCEPTED THE SLAVE SHIP.
THE PHOTOS HAVE ATTRACTED THE
ATTENTION OF SOUTH AFRICA'S
LEADING HUMAN RIGHTS ADVOCATE,
ARCHBISHOP DESMOND TUTU.
THEY REMIND ONE SO VERY MUCH
OF PICTURES OUT
OF THE HOLOCAUST,
BELSEN AND THINGS OF THAT SORT.
WE ARE SHOWING OUR
INHUMANITY TO ONE ANOTHER.
WE HAVE BANDIED ABOUT
THAT WORD, SLAVERY,
NOT ALWAYS AWARE OF
JUST HOW INHUMANE
THE CONDITIONS WERE.
Narrator: BEGINNING
IN THE 15th CENTURY,
SLAVE SHIPS TOOK MORE THAN 1 2
MILLION PEOPLE OUT OF AFRICA.
THE VAST MAJORITY
WENT TO THE AMERICAS.
THESE SHIPS ARE THE
RESEARCH SUBJECT
OF MARINE ARCHAEOLOGIST
JACO BOSHOFF.
IF HE CAN FIND THE MEERMIN,
IT WILL BE ONE OF ONLY A FEW
SUCH VESSELS DISCOVERED.
THE IMPORTANT THING ABOUT IT
IS THAT SHE WAS A SLAVE VESSEL
AND THEN THE FACT THAT THERE
WAS A REBELLION ON-BOARD,
AND THAT'S THE MAIN REASON
WHY SHE GOT WRECKED.
ALSO, WE DO NOT KNOW TOO
MUCH ABOUT THESE VESSELS
THAT THE DUTCH EAST
INDIA COMPANY USED AT
THE CAPE FOR SLAVERY.
Narrator: THIS COASTLINE
IS CALLED ''THE GRAVEYARD
OF SHIPWRECKS.''
MORE THAN 200 BOATS
LIE BURIED HERE.
THE LACK OF OXYGEN UNDER
THE SEABED SHOULD PRESERVE
THE MEERMIN WRECK.
BUT WHERE IS IT?
Boshoff: WE KNOW THAT THE
MEERMIN DOES NOT HAVE A
LOT OF MATERIAL LEFT ON IT
BECAUSE A LOT OF
IT WAS TAKEN OFF AT THE
TIME WHEN SHE WRECKED,
SO IT IS A BIT LIKE FINDING
A NEEDLE IN A HAYSTACK
UNDERWATER AND UNDER SAND.
Narrator: THE MOST EFFECTIVE
WAY TO FIND IT IS BY LOCATING
ANY IRON-BASED ARTIFACTS
THAT WENT DOWN WITH
THE WOODEN SHIP.
THIS CROP DUSTER IS EQUIPPED
WITH HIGHLY SENSITIVE
MAGNETOMETRY SENSORS,
WHICH CAN PENETRATE THROUGH
OCEAN WATER AND BEACH SAND.
IF ANY IRON REMAINS OF
THE MEERMIN ARE HERE,
THEY WILL LEAVE
A MAGNETIC TRACE.
Boshoff: WE'RE VERY FORTUNATE
IN THE FACT THAT WE'VE GOT THIS
SHIP'S PLAN OF THE MEERMIN,
WHICH WE FOUND WAS IN THE
SCHEEPVAART MUSEUM IN AMSTERDAM.
IT WILL GUIDE US TOWARDS WHAT
THE SIZE OF THE VESSEL WAS:
HOW WIDE IT WAS, HOW
MANY RIBS DID IT HAVE.
A VESSEL LIKE THIS--OBVIOUSLY,
MADE LARGELY OUT OF TIMBER--
WOULD HAVE USED
OAK, SO OAK IS SOMETHING
THAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR,
AND THE FASTENINGS
WOULD HAVE BEEN METAL,
WOULD HAVE BEEN IRON,
SO THERE'S A LOT OF IRON THERE
AND THAT'S WHAT WE'RE HOPING TO
PICK UP WITH THE MAGNETOMETER.
Narrator: IN THE END, IT WILL
BE THE SLAVES WHO DETERMINE
THE FATE OF THE MEERMIN.
THEIR CHAINS DO NOT PREVENT
THEM FROM CHOOSING LEADERS
FOR THEIR REBELLION.
EVEN BEFORE THE SHIP
SETS SAIL, ONE MAN LEADS AN
ESCAPE ATTEMPT, BUT FAILS.
HIS NAME IS MASSAVANNA.
HE IS FROM THE VILLAGE OF
TULEAR IN WESTERN MADAGASCAR.
HE HAS MANY SUPPORTERS,
INCLUDING A STRONG
FIGHTER NAMED KOESAAIJ.
[DOOR UNLATCHING]
KOESAAIJ'S EXPERIENCE
ON-BOARD THE MEERMIN
WAS LATER RECORDED
IN DETAIL BY THE VOC.
NOW, LUCY CAMPBELL WANTS TO
READ THIS FIRSTHAND ACCOUNT
OF A FREE MAN TURNED SLAVE.
I GATHER YOU WANT TO
KNOW ABOUT MASSAVANNA,
WHAT WE CAN FIND OUT ABOUT HIM.
WHAT IS REALLY EXCITING
IS THAT HERE WE HAVE
THE CROSS-EXAMINATION OF
MASSAVANNA AT HIS TRIAL,
AND HERE HE IS: ''MASSAVANNA
FROM MADAGASCAR.
AGE ABOUT 26 YEARS
OLD,'' SO HE WAS--WE KNOW
THAT, THAT HE WAS 26.
AND HE'S ASKED QUESTIONS
ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED
ON-BOARD THE SHIP,
BUT ALSO, HE GIVES DETAILS
ABOUT HOW HE CAME TO
BE SOLD AS A SLAVE.
Man: MY NAME IS MASSAVANNA.
I WAS ASKED BY THE KING OF
TULEAR TO VISIT THE DUTCH SHIP.
WE WENT TO VIEW THE SHIP.
I WAS DRESSED IN CLEAN CLOTHES
WITH GOLD AND SILVER ORNAMENTS.
WHEN THIS WAS DONE,
HALFWAY BACK, THE
KING TIED ME UP,
AND HIS PEOPLE UNDRESSED ME.
THEY TOOK MY GOLD, SILVER,
AND CLOTHES OFF MY BODY
AND THEY SOLD ME AS A SLAVE.
Narrator: SCATTERED AROUND
CAPE TOWN ARE THE REMAINS
OF OLD SLAVE LODGES,
WHERE THE MEMORIES OF
THE CITY'S SLAVE HISTORY
CAN STILL BE EXPERIENCED.
Campbell: BEFORE THE
EUROPEANS CAME TO MADAGASCAR,
THE MADAGASCANS, THEY
FOUGHT AMONGST EACH OTHER.
THOSE THAT WON THESE
BATTLES USED TO TAKE
SLAVES AS SPOILS OF WAR
AND THEY USED TO SELL THESE
SLAVES TO THE EUROPEANS,
SO NOW THERE WAS A MARKET
FOR THEM AND THE KING
TOOK ADVANTAGE OF THIS.
AND THIS IS HOW THEY STARTED
TO--IT BECAME A REGULAR THING,
AND IT BECAME A TRADING
POST FOR THE EUROPEANS
AND FOR THE MADAGASCANS
TO TRADE IN SLAVES.
Narrator: MOST OF THE
SLAVES PURCHASED BY THE VOC
WOULD REMAIN THE
PROPERTY OF THE COMPANY,
BUT CAPE TOWN ALSO HAD
TRADERS WHO PROVIDED PRIVATE
INDIVIDUALS WITH SLAVES.
A TYPICAL SLAVE WOULD
COST THE EQUIVALENT OF
TWO OXEN AND A CART.
Campbell: YOU ARE
JUST A COMMODITY.
YOU CAN'T THINK. YOU
CAN'T SAY ANYTHING.
YOU HAVE TO BE
QUIET AT ALL TIMES.
SO WHAT I'M GOING TO BE DOING
IS I'M GOING TO BE SELLING YOU.
NOW, REMEMBER, THERE IS GOING
TO BE PEOPLE STANDING THERE.
THEY ARE THE BUYERS, AND THEY
ARE GOING TO BID FOR YOU.
SO NOW I WANT YOU
TO COME FORWARD.
I'M GOING TO BE LOOKING
FOR... CAN HE HEAR PROPERLY?
CAN HE SEE?
DO YOU HAVE ALL YOUR TEETH?
[MAN SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
Campbell: YOU'VE
GOT STRONG MUSCLES,
AND THAT'S WHY IT'S IMPORTANT
THAT I HAVE A STRONG SLAVE
BECAUSE WHAT'S THE USE
THERE, FOR ME TO BUY YOU
IF YOU CAN'T WORK FOR ME?
I WILL NOW HAVE ME THE SLAVE.
PERFECT, HE'S YOUNG.
HE'S STRONG ENOUGH
AND HE CAN WORK
FOR ME LONG HOURS,
CAN CARRY WOOD,
CAN CARRY WATER,
AND WE CAN HAVE LOTS
OF OTHER SLAVES.
Narrator: THE MEERMIN
HAS A 4-WEEK JOURNEY FROM
MADAGASCAR TO CAPE TOWN
AT THE HEIGHT OF SUMMER.
TEMPERATURES CAN
EXCEED 100 DEGREES.
THE MISERY BELOW DECK
IS ALMOST UNIMAGINABLE.
IT IS A NIGHTMARISH VO YAGE.
ARCHAEOLOGIST JACO BOSHOFF IS
CONDUCTING A DETAILED STUDY
OF THE MEERMIN BLUEPRINTS
TO CREATE AN ACCURATE
3-D COMPUTER GRAPHIC
MODEL OF THE SLAVE SHIP.
KNOWING THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE
SHIP WILL HELP HIM UNDERSTAND
HOW THE REBELLION HAPPENED.
Boshoff: THE VESSEL WAS
ABOUT 30 ODD METERS LONG,
SO THAT'S QUITE SMALL.
THEY DIDN'T WANT TO HAVE
A BIG VESSEL BECAUSE
IT COSTS MORE MONEY.
Narrator: THE MEERMIN WAS A
MULTI-PURPOSE CARGO VESSEL,
OUTFITTED IN AMSTERDAM
IN 1 761 TO CARRY SLAVES.
WHEN SAILING ON A
SLAVING VO YAGE,
MORE THAN 200 PEOPLE
WOULD BE CRAMMED ON-BOARD.
THOSE OFF-DUTY WOULD BE IN THE
FORWARD CABINS AT THE BOW.
THE OFFICERS WERE
BASED TOWARD THE STERN,
THE CAPTAIN'S CABIN BUILT
UNDER THE QUARTER DECK.
BELOW THIS IS THE GUN ROOM,
WHERE AMPLE SUPPLIES OF
GUNS AND GUNPOWDER WERE
KEPT TO TRADE FOR SLAVES.
IF THE VESSEL WAS
FOLLOWING VOC RULES,
NO SIGN OF THE HUMAN CARGO WOULD
BE PERMITTED ON THE TOP DECK.
THEY WOULD BE KEPT BELOW.
THEY WERE EXPECTED TO
REMAIN HERE FOR THE COURSE
OF THE MONTH-LONG JOURNEY.
Boshoff: THESE PEOPLE WOULD BE
SHACKLED UP IN THE SLAVE DECK,
SO WE'D HAVE ROWS OF
PEOPLE-- TWO, TWO--SHACKLED,
AND THEY WOULD OFTEN
HAVE ONE LONG CHAIN
RUNNING THE WHOLE LENGTH
TO GET AS MANY SLAVES
IN AS POSSIBLE.
REMEMBER, IN THE 18th CENTURY,
THERE WAS NO HUMAN RIGHTS.
HUMAN RIGHTS DIDN'T EXIST.
Narrator: THERE WOULD
BE LITTLE LIGHT.
ALL THE GUN HATCHES ARE
SEALED UP TO PREVENT
SLAVES FROM ESCAPING.
ONLY TWO SMALL PORTALS PROVIDE
VENTILATION FOR THE SLAVES.
Boshoff: IN FACT, SOME
OF THESE VESSELS, YOU
COULDN'T LIGHT A CANDLE
BECAUSE IT WAS SO
STUFFY AND ROTTEN.
Narrator: NIGEL WORDEN
IS INVESTIGATING
JUST HOW MANY PEOPLE WERE
ENSLAVED ON THE MEERMIN.
Worden: ONE OF THE
PUZZLING THINGS ABOUT
SOME OF THESE SOURCES IS
THAT THE NUMBERS OF SLAVES
ON-BOARD THE SHIP DON'T ADD UP.
YOU COULD SAY THAT THAT WAS
BAD MEMORY, BUT I THINK THERE'S
SOMETHING ELSE GOING ON HERE.
WE KNOW THAT ON-BOARD
ALL VOC VESSELS,
CERTAINLY THE CAPTAIN AND THE
HIGHER OFFICERS WERE CARRYING
GOODS WHICH THEY WERE NOT
TO CARRY INTO THE COMPANY
AND THEY WERE SELLING OFF
PRIVATELY THEMSELVES.
THIS IS HOW MOST SLAVES,
ACTUALLY, GOT TO THE CAPE,
AND IN THIS CASE, WHAT I
THINK IS CLEARLY HAPPENING IS
THAT THEY'VE GOT MORE SLAVES
THAN THEY'VE OFFICIALLY
ADMITTED TO THE COMPANY,
AND THEY'RE HOPING
THEY'RE GOING TO BE ABLE TO SELL
THEM OFF PRIVATELY THEMSELVES
WHEN THEY GET TO CAPE TOWN.
AND THE CONSEQUENCE OF THIS
IS THAT THE PEOPLE LIKE MULLER
AND CRAUSE ARE DESPERATE
TO CRAM AS MANY SLAVES ON-BOARD
THE SHIP AS THEY CAN, MORE SO
THAN THEY ARE DECLARING,
WHICH MEANS THERE'S GOING
TO BE OVERCROWDING, DESPERATE
OVERCROWDING AS A RESULT.
CONSEQUENCE THAT YOU GET
IS DISEASE. YOU WOULD GET
THINGS LIKE DYSENTERY,
TYPHUS, AND THINGS LIKE
THAT THAT COULD BREAK OUT
UNDER CONDITIONS LIKE THIS,
AND YOU'VE HAD SOME
OF THESE VESSELS WITH
LARGE AMOUNTS OF DEATHS.
Narrator: THE MEERMIN SURVIVORS
LATER TESTIFIED TO THE VOC
THAT DISEASE WAS RIFE
ON THEIR SHIP, TOO.
SLAVES WERE DYING...
AND DISEASE WAS SPREADING.
Campbell: I THINK THE SITUATION
IN THE DECK WAS VERY VOLATILE
WITH THE SMELL AND THE
STENCH AND THAT SICKNESS
BECAUSE THERE WAS DISEASE,
ALSO, UNDERNEATH THE SHIP.
THE DUTCH WERE SCARED THAT
SOMETHING WAS GOING TO HAPPEN.
THEY WERE GOING TO DIE
AND THEY WERE GOING
TO LOSE THE COMMODITY.
Narrator: TWO DAYS
INTO THE VO YAGE, CRAUSE
MAKES A FATAL DECISION,
ACCORDING TO CAPTAIN MULLER'S
TESTIMONY FOR THE VOC.
Boshoff: CRAUSE STRONGLY
REQUESTED THAT THE SLAVES BE
FREED FROM THEIR SHACKLES
AND THAT ''WE SHOULD LET
THEM LOOSE ON THE SHIP.''
Worden: WHEN YOUR CARGO IS
SPICES OR MATERIAL GOODS
BEING BROUGHT FROM
ASIA, WHICH MOST OF THE
SHIPS WERE CARRYING,
THEN IT WAS IN THE INTERESTS OF
BOTH OF THEM TO KEEP THEM SAFE
AND TO KEEP THE SHIP SAILING.
BUT WHEN YOUR CARGO
ARE HUMAN BEINGS
AND THE ISSUE IS THEIR HEALTH
AND KEEPING THEM ALIVE,
BY BRINGING THEM UP ON-BOARD
THE DECK, WHICH CRAUSE DID,
IT'S ACTUALLY ENDANGERING
THE SECURITY OF THE SHIP.
THEN YOU'VE GOT
A DIVISION IN INTEREST
BETWEEN THE TWO OF THEM.
[SPEAKING DUTCH]
Worden: SO HERE WE HAVE MULLER
SAYING THAT CRAUSE HAD SAID
THAT ON ALL THESE OTHER
JOURNEYS, HE'D LET THE SLAVES
FREE FROM THEIR CHAINS
SO HE'D NEVER HAD ANYTHING
TO FEAR FROM THEM.
Man as Muller: I DID NOT WANT
TO GIVE PERMISSION FOR THIS,
BUT THE SURGEON SAID THERE
WERE NO MEDICINES ON-BOARD
TO PREVENT ILLNESS
AND THAT THE CREW WAS
ALSO STARTING TO SUFFER.
THE CAPTAIN'S AUTHORITY
WAS TO DO WITH THE VESSEL
ITSELF, SAILING THE VESSEL.
SO, IN ESSENCE,
THE HEAD MERCHANT HAD
A LOT OF INFLUENCE
IN TERMS OF WHAT HAPPENS TO
THE SLAVES ON THE VESSEL.
Muller: CRAUSE TOLD ME THAT
IF THE SLAVES BECAME ILL,
AND IF SOME OF THEM DIED, IT
WOULD BE MY RESPONSIBILITY.
I AGREED THAT SOME
SLAVES COULD BE FREED.
Narrator: IT IS A
CRITICAL DECISION.
IT PLAYS RIGHT INTO THE
HANDS OF THE SLAVES.
Massavanna: THE SLAVES
PLANNED FOR A LONG TIME TO
BECOME MASTERS OF THE SHIP.
OUR AIM WAS TO GO BACK
TO OUR OWN COUNTRY.
Campbell: I THINK THAT
UNDERNEATH THE DECK,
THEY BELIEVED THAT THEY WERE
GOING TO TAKE OVER THE SHIP
BECAUSE THEY WERE FREE
MEN IN THEIR MENTALITY.
THEY WERE NOT MENTALLY
ENSLAVED AT THAT POINT YET.
THEY WERE STRONG MEN
THAT BELIEVED THAT THEY
WERE GOING TO BE FREE,
EVEN THOUGH THEY WERE IN
CHAINS AND IN SHACKLES.
Massavanna: WE WERE ORDERED
TO WORK ON THE SHIP.
WE OFTEN PULLED ROPES.
WE WORKED WITH SAILS.
Narrator: PUTTING THE SLAVES
TO WORK MAKES THE JOURNEY
EASIER FOR THE SAILORS,
SOMETHING THEY
COULD GET USED TO.
Muller: CRAUSE TOLD ME
IT WAS NOT DANGEROUS TO
UNSHACKLE THE SLAVES.
FROM TIME TO TIME THEREAFTER,
MOST SLAVES WERE FREED.
Boshoff: YOU'VE GOT ALL
THE AMMUNITION, IF YOU WILL,
FOR AN EXPLOSIVE SITUATION.
ALL THE ELEMENTS ARE
THERE. BASICALLY, ALL YOU
NEEDED WAS A TRIGGER,
AND THAT TRIGGER WAS
SUPPLIED BY THE SENIOR
MERCHANT, FUNNY ENOUGH,
AND THE MAN WHO WAS THE
GREEDIEST OF THE LOT.
Muller: IT WAS FEBRUARY 18.
SAILOR HERMAN COPES WAS
ORDERED TO FETCH THE ASSEGAIS
AND SWORDS TO BE CLEANED.
Narrator: ASSEGAIS ARE
TRADITIONAL WEAPONS OF
WAR FROM MADAGASCAR--
SPEARS.
Boshoff: BUT WHAT THE
DUTCH OFTEN FORGOT,
AND CERTAINLY IN THE CASE
OF THE MEERMIN STORY,
IS THAT THE MADAGASCANS
WAS A WARLIKE PEOPLE,
SO YOU WOULD HAVE CHARACTERS
ON-BOARD THIS VESSEL
THAT INHERENTLY
WANTED TO BREAK FREE.
Massavanna: IT WAS MORNING.
A SAILOR BROUGHT
THE ASSEGAIS TO US,
6 IN TOTAL.
Boshoff: CRAUSE WAS
LAUGHING AND SAID, ''I'M
SURE THERE ARE PEOPLE
WHO WOULD DOUBT THE
WISDOM OF ASKING SLAVES
TO CLEAN THESE WEAPONS.''
Campbell: I CAN'T BELIEVE
THAT THEY ACTUALLY DID IT.
I MEAN, HOW CAN YOU
GIVE SLAVES WEAPONS?
AT THAT POINT, THEY
DIDN'T THINK THAT THE
SLAVES WOULD DO IT
BECAUSE A SLAVE DOESN'T THINK.
A SLAVE DOESN'T MAKE DECISIONS.
A SLAVE DOESN'T HAVE AN OPINION.
A SLAVE IS PROPERTY.
Massavanna: THE SLAVES HAD 4
ASSEGAIS IN OUR POSSESSION
WHEN THE BATTLE STARTED.
WE ALL ATTACKED
AT THE SAME TIME.
[SLAVES CLAMORING]
Muller: SUDDENLY I HEARD
SCREAMING AND GROANING
OF SOME OF THE CREW.
Massavanna: CRAUSE WAS STABBED
IN HIS CHEST AND ALSO HIS BELLY.
HE FELL DOWN DEAD IMMEDIATELY.
SEVERAL SAILORS FLED
INTO THE MAINTOP.
3 OF THEM WERE THROWN OVERBOARD.
Muller: THEN I STARTED
RUNNING TO THE CABIN.
I WAS THEN STABBED
ON MY LEFT SIDE.
I RECEIVED ANOTHER
TWO STABS IN MY BACK.
ALL THESE WOUNDS WERE
INFLICTED ON ME BY MASSAVANNA.
Narrator: THE CAPTAIN
ISN'T SAFE IN HIS CABIN.
THE SLAVES COULD BREAK THROUGH
THE DOOR AT ANY MOMENT,
SO HE CLIMBS OUT THE PORT WINDOW
AND SLIDES DOWN THE RUDDER
TO THE GUN ROOM.
UP ON DECK, THE SLAVES TAKE
POSSESSION OF THE MUSKETS.
Massavanna: WE DECIDED
TO DO EVERYTHING POSSIBLE
TO BECOME MASTERS OF THE SHIP,
EVEN IF WE HAD TO STAY
AT THE SEA A LONG TIME.
MADAGASCAR!
[CHEERING]
Campbell: I THINK HE ACTUALLY
DID SURPRISE HIMSELF.
IN THAT FEW HOURS, HE
CONQUERED THE MIGHTY VOC,
AND HE TOOK OVER THAT SHIP.
Narrator: 30 SAILORS ARE
KILLED IN THE UPRISING,
STABBED, SHOT, OR
THROWN OVERBOARD.
THE SURVIVORS BARRICADE
THEMSELVES IN THE
GUN ROOM BELOW DECK.
THE 30 REMAINING SAILORS HAVE
ONLY A SACK OF POTATOES,
SOME RAW BACON, AND
A CASK OF PALM WINE
TO FORTIFY THEIR NERVES.
THEY KNOW THEY CAN'T
REMAIN HERE FOR LONG.
THEY NEED FOOD, THEY NEED TO
REGAIN CONTROL OF THEIR SHIP.
NOW THESE GUYS ARE
SITTING AT THE BACK.
THERE'S VERY LITTLE SUPPLIES
IN THE AREA WHERE THEY ARE
BECAUSE MOST OF THE SUPPLIES
WOULD HAVE BEEN KEPT UP FRONT,
AND FOR THEM TO GET TO THAT,
THEY WOULD HAVE HAD TO RUN
THE GAUNTLET OF
ALL THESE SLAVES,
WHICH IS QUITE DIFFICULT,
I MEAN, OBVIOUSLY,
AND THEY DID TRY THAT,
AND THE SLAVES WOULD BE
SHOOTING DOWN FROM THE HATCHES.
[SCREAMING]
[GUNSHOT]
[GUNFIRE CONTINUING]
LIKE I SAID, NOW YOU HAD
THE SLAVES IN CONTROL,
BUT THEY WEREN'T QUITE
FULLY IN CONTROL.
THE REASON BEING THAT THEY WERE
NOW IN CHARGE OF A MACHINE
THAT THEY DIDN'T
KNOW HOW TO OPERATE,
AND THIS IS THE SHIP.
THEY DIDN'T KNOW HOW
TO SAIL THE VESSEL.
Narrator: BY NOW, THE MEERMIN
IS DRIFTING AIMLESSLY
HUNDREDS OF MILES FROM LAND.
THE SAILORS ARE DESPERATE.
Muller: THE SHIP'S MATE
BROUGHT UP A BARREL CONTAINING
25 POUNDS OF GUNPOWDER.
HE TOOK THIS UPSTAIRS AND LIT IT
WITH THE PURPOSE OF
FRIGHTENING THE SLAVES.
[BOOM]
Narrator: THE PLAN FAILS,
BUT IT DOES GET THE
SLAVES' ATTENTION.
Muller: A FEMALE SLAVE WAS ASKED
TO TELL THEM THAT THE SAILORS
WOULD BLOW UP THE WHOLE
DECK WITH ALL THE SLAVES
IF THEY WOULD NOT
SURRENDER THEMSELVES
AND TO OFFER THEM
A PEACE PROPOSAL.
THE SLAVES AGREED
AND ASKED TO SEE ME.
Narrator: OLAF LEIJ IS
ABLE TO SPEAK TO THE SLAVES
IN THEIR NATIVE TONGUE.
[SPEAKING MALAGASY]
OLAF LEIJ IS REALLY
LEFT IN CHARGE OF THINGS
BECAUSE CRAUSE'S NOW DEAD,
MULLER IS STILL SICK,
UNABLE TO TAKE ANY CONTROL.
MADAGASCAR!
Muller: THEY TOLD ME
THEY SHOULD BE TAKEN BACK
TO THEIR OWN COUNTRY AND TO
THROW THE GUNPOWDER OVERBOARD.
LEIJ TOLD THE SLAVES
THAT WE WOULD NOT THROW
THE GUNPOWDER OVERBOARD
BUT WE WOULD TAKE THE
SLAVES BACK TO THEIR
OWN COUNTRY MADAGASCAR.
IN THIS MANNER,
PEACE WAS MADE.
[SPEAKING MALAGASY]
Narrator: A DEAL IS MADE.
HA HA HA!
BUT OLAF LEIJ AND HIS CAPTAIN
PLAN ON HAVING THE LAST LAUGH.
THEY HAVE NO INTENTION
OF TAKING THE SLAVES
BACK TO THEIR HOMELAND.
Muller: I GAVE INSTRUCTIONS
THAT THE SHIP SHOULD SET COURSE
IN THE DIRECTION OF CAPE TOWN.
THE CAPTAIN INSTRUCTED ME TO
SET A COURSE TO NORTH-NORTHWEST
IN ORDER TO GET NEAR LAND.
Worden: THEY AGREE
THAT THEY WILL TAKE THE
SLAVES BACK TO MADAGASCAR
BY SAILING--BY SAILING EAST,
BUT IN FACT, THEY SAIL
THE SHIP NORTHWEST,
AND THEREFORE THE SHIP'S GOING
IN THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
Narrator: THE DECEPTION
IS A BREATHTAKING GAMBLE.
RETURNING TO MADAGASCAR
MEANT LOSING THE
VOC's PRECIOUS CARGO,
BUT SAILING TO CAPE TOWN
MIGHT MEAN LOSING THEIR LIVES
IF THEIR PLAN IS DISCOVERED.
Worden: IT IS A
VERY RISKY STRATEGY.
FIRST OF ALL, THEY REALLY
DON'T KNOW JUST HOW MUCH
THE SLAVES AND MASSAVANNA
WOULD KNOW ABOUT THE
CURRENTS AND WHERE THEY ARE.
Narrator: THE NORTH-NORTHWEST
HEADING THE CAPTAIN SETS
WILL TAKE THE SHIP STRAIGHT TO
THE SOUTHERNMOST TIP OF AFRICA,
THE GRAVEYARD OF SHIPWRECKS.
IT'S BEEN TWO WEEKS SINCE
BOSHOFF'S MAGNETOMETRY SURVEY.
HE NOW HAS THE RESULTS.
THIS BLUE BAND REPRESENTS
THE FLIGHT PATH
OF THE AIRCRAFT THAT
CARRIED THE MAGNETOMETERS,
AND WHAT IT SHOWS US
ARE THESE ANOMALIES,
THE RED DOTS THAT YOU CAN SEE.
LIKE THAT ONE FOR INSTANCE IS A
FISHING TRAWLER THAT WE KNOW OF.
WHAT'S MORE INTERESTING
ARE THE SMALLER ONES
THAT YOU CANNOT SEE
SO CLEARLY THAT ARE VERY
LIKELY TO BE THE MEERMIN
BECAUSE SHE WAS A
SMALLER SHIP AND WOODEN
AND HAS BROKEN UP OVER
THE YEARS OBVIOUSLY.
SO WE ARE REALLY
INTERESTED IN THOSE.
Narrator: OF COURSE THESE
SITES ARE ALL UNDERWATER.
BOSHOFF WANTS TO
SAIL OUT INTO THE BAY
TO SEE FOR HIMSELF WHERE THE
SLAVE SHIP DRAMA PLAYED OUT.
10 DAYS AFTER THE MUTINY, THE
MEERMIN SAILS INTO VIEW OF LAND
NEAR THE DUTCH
SETTLEMENT OF STRUTSBAAI.
MOST OF THE SLAVES
THINK THEY ARE HOME,
BUT MASSAVANNA HAS DOUBTS.
[SPEAKING MALAGASY]
Worden: BUT THEN, AS
IT'S DESCRIBED HERE,
THE LEADER ASKS LEIJ
WHY HE HAD NOT TAKEN
THEM TO THEIR COUNTRY,
AND HOW DID HE KNOW
THIS? WELL, HE KNEW THIS
BECAUSE THE SUN WASN'T
RISING IN HIS FACE.
IN OTHER WORDS, THEY
WEREN'T FACING EAST
AS THEY SHOULD HAVE BEEN.
AND LEIJ, WHO HAS BEEN RUMBLED
OF COURSE AT THIS POINT,
WITH FAIRLY QUICK WITS
PERHAPS, SAID, WELL, THEY'RE
ON THE EAST SIDE OF MADAGASCAR.
THEN THE LEADER POINTS
OUT SOMETHING ELSE.
Muller: A NUMBER
OF BIRDS WERE SEEN,
AND THE SLAVE SAID THAT
ONE COULDN'T FIND SUCH
BIRDS ON MADAGASCAR.
AND LEIJ THEN COMES
UP WITH THIS ANSWER.
''WELL, THESE ARE THE KINDS
OF BIRDS THAT ARE FOUND
''ON SMALL ISLANDS LYING
OFF THE COAST OF MADAGASCAR
''AND WERE TYPICAL TO THE ONES
WHICH WOULDN'T HAVEN'T BEEN
FOUND ON THE WEST COAST.''
I THINK THERE'S NO DOUBT
THAT IF WE PUT OURSELVES
OR TRY TO PUT OURSELVES
IN THE MINDS OF THE SLAVES
AND OF MASSAVANNA, THEY
MIGHT HAVE REALIZED
OR SUSPECTED THAT
SOMETHING'S GONE WRONG HERE,
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, AT
LAST THEY'RE SEEING LAND,
AND THEY'RE HOPING
AGAINST HOPE THAT FREEDOM
IS GOING TO BE THEIRS AT LAST.
Boshoff: ONE COULD PROBABLY
THINK OF THE MALAGASIES
ON THE SHIP THINKING THAT
THIS MIGHT BE MADAGASCAR
IN EXCITEMENT, YOU KNOW.
FINALLY AFTER SO MANY DAYS
GETTING OFF THE STINKING TUB
AND BEING EXCITED.
AND YOU HAVE THE SAILORS
IN THE OTHER SENSE
ALSO BEING EXCITED BUT
FOR A DIFFERENT REASON
BECAUSE THEY KNOW THEY'RE
AT THE CAPE AGULHAS,
AND THEY KNOW THAT SALVATION
IS AT HAND FOR THEM.
Narrator: DROPPING
ANCHOR A MILE OFFSHORE,
THE BELEAGUERED
MEERMIN WILL NOW DRAW
A NEW GROUP OF CHARACTERS
INTO ITS STORY.
LOCAL FARMERS NOTICE THE
SHIP'S FLAG IS NOT FLYING,
A SIGN OF DISTRESS.
A REPORT OF A SUSPECT
SHIP IS IMMEDIATELY SENT
TO THE VOC's HEAD OFFICIAL FOR
THE AREA JOHANNES LE SUEUR.
I THINK LE SUEUR, THE
MAGISTRATE IN STELLENBOSCH,
IS THE KEY FIGURE HERE.
HE HAS TO GO THERE.
IT'S PART OF HIS DISTRICT,
THIS ENORMOUS DISTRICT
OF THE COLONY,
AND AGULHAS IS NOT CAPE TOWN.
HE'S IN A VERY REMOTE
PART OF THE COLONY.
THERE ARE NOT TROOPS AROUND HIM.
SO HE'S ON HIS OWN THERE.
Narrator: LE SUEUR KNOWS HE MUST
CONTAIN THE SLAVE REBELLION.
AFTER ALL, THE VOC IS
RUNNING A SLAVE SOCIETY.
[SPEAKS DUTCH]
NEWS OF A SUCCESSFUL
SLAVE REVOLT
COULD SEND PANIC
THROUGH THE COLONY
AND EMPOWER MORE
SLAVES TO TAKE UP ARMS.
Muller: THE NEXT MORNING,
THE SLAVES DEMANDED TO GO
TO THE SHORE IN A ROWBOAT.
AS MANY AS POSSIBLE BOARDED.
THE BOAT WOULD RETURN AFTER
THE SLAVES LANDED ASHORE.
Narrator: EVERYONE AGREES
THE SLAVES WILL LIGHT
3 BONFIRES ON THE BEACH
IF IT IS MADAGASCAR.
NO. LEIJ'S PLAYING A
VERY CUNNING GAME HERE,
AND HE'S TRYING TO
OUTWIT THE SLAVES
AT THEIR OWN GAME, AS IT WERE,
BUT OF COURSE HE'S
A VERY DESPERATE MAN
BECAUSE HE KNOWS THAT ONCE
THOSE SLAVES GET ASHORE
AND DISCOVER THEY'RE
NOT IN MADAGASCAR
AND IF THEY GET BACK TO THE
SHIP AND REPORT THAT BACK
TO MASSAVANNA AND THE
OTHERS, ALL HELL IS
GOING TO BREAK LOOSE
AND THEY'RE GONNA HAVE
THEIR THROATS CUT.
Narrator: BY THE TIME THE
MALAGASY ARRIVE ONSHORE
LOCAL FARMERS ARE WAITING.
THEY HAVE FORMED A MILITIA.
[GUNFIRE]
15 SLAVES ARE KILLED, THE
REST PUT BACK IN CHAINS.
FROM HIS POSITION
ON THE MEERMIN,
MASSAVANNA CANNOT SEE THE
MASSACRE ON THE BEACH.
HE IS WAITING FOR THE BONFIRES.
JOHANNES LE SUEUR ARRIVES
IN STRUTSBAAI TWO DAYS
AFTER THE MEERMIN WAS SPOTTED.
HE QUICKLY TAKES CHARGE
OF THE SITUATION ONSHORE.
FOR 3 MORE DAYS, MASSAVANNA AND
THE OTHERS DESPERATELY WAIT
FOR THE BONFIRE SIGNAL
IN THE GUN ROOM, THE
SAILOR'S SITUATION
IS REACHING A CRISIS POINT.
Muller: LEIJ CAME TO TELL
ME THAT IT WOULDN'T BE LONG
BEFORE THE SLAVES WOULD
BREAK THROUGH THE HOLD
AND GET TO THE GUNPOWDER ROOM.
WE COULD NOT STAY AT
ANCHOR ANY LONGER.
Narrator: LEIJ POURS OUT
HIS CONCERNS IN A LETTER.
Worden: THIS IS THE LETTER
WHICH COMES FROM LEIJ,
WHICH HE HAD WRITTEN SORT
OF COOPED UP IN THIS ROOM,
AND ONE HAS THE SORT OF
NOTION OF HIM WRITING THIS
IN A RATHER CRAMPED HANDWRITING.
AND SEE HERE THE HANDWRITING
IS EXTREMELY ERRATIC,
AND IT'S A LETTER
OF DESPERATION.
Man as Leij: THROUGH THE
GUIDANCE OF OUR ALMIGHTY
AND BELOVED GOD,
THE 1 40 MALE AND FEMALE SLAVES
WHICH WE EXCHANGED AT MADAGASCAR
HAVE REVOLTED AND
TAKEN OVER THE MEERMIN.
ABOUT 70 OF THEM WENT
ASHORE WITH THE BOAT,
BUT AT LEAST 50 HAVE
REMAINED ON BOARD.
32 OF THE EUROPEANS
ARE STILL ALIVE,
BUT MOST OF THEM ARE WOUNDED.
THE SLAVES ARE IN
CONTROL OF THE WHOLE SHIP
EXCEPT FOR THE GUN ROOM,
TO WHICH WE HAVE FLED.
Worden: ONE OF THE MOST
EXTRAORDINARY THINGS
IN THIS EXTREMELY
EXTRAORDINARY CASE
IS THE STORY OF THIS BOTTLE
AND WHAT HAPPENED TO IT.
Leij: WE ARE SCARED THE
SLAVES MAY ATTACK AND
KILL US AT ANY MOMENT.
WE CONTINUALLY PRAY TO
OUR LORD FOR HIS MERCY
AND THAT HE MAY RESCUE US
FROM OUR MISERABLE PLIGHT.
THIS IS A MAN WHO IS
FACING THE FACT THAT HE'S
ABOUT TO MEET HIS MAKER.
HE BELIEVES HE'S GONNA
DIE, AND HIS ONLY HOPE
IS TO BE ABLE TO HOPE THAT BY
THROWING THE BOTTLE OVERBOARD
SOMEBODY'S GONNA FIND
IT AND THE AUTHORITIES
ARE GONNA COME TO THEIR RESCUE.
IF YOU WROTE THIS UP IN A
NOVEL, NOBODY WOULD BELIEVE IT,
BUT IT ACTUALLY HAPPENED,
AND IT HAPPENED LIKE THIS.
AND WHAT HAPPENS IS THE BOTTLE
IS FOUND BY THIS KHOI WOMAN
WHO IS OUT ON THE SHORE.
SHE TAKES IT TO
THE AUTHORITIES, AND
WHO'S THE AUTHORITY?
JUST HAPPENS TO BE THE LANDROST
OF STELLENBOSCH, WHO'S THERE.
Leij: ALTHOUGH WE TRUST
IN THE LORD TO SAVE US,
WE KINDLY REQUEST THE FINDER
OF THIS LETTER TO LIGHT
3 FIRES ON THE BEACH AND STAND
GUARD AT THESE BEHIND THE DUNES
SHOULD THE SHIP RUN AGROUND SO
THAT THE SLAVES MAY NOT BECOME
AWARE THAT THIS IS
A CHRISTIAN COUNTRY.
THEY WILL CERTAINLY KILL
US IF THEY ESTABLISH
THAT WE MADE THEM BELIEVE
THAT THIS IS THEIR COUNTRY.
IN THE NAME OF THE LORD, WE
REMAIN YOUR OBEDIENT SERVANT.
OLAF LEIJ.
SO LE LUEUR'S IN A REAL DILEMMA.
HE'S GOT TO DECIDE WHAT TO DO.
EITHER WAY HE'S
TAKING A BIG RISK,
AND HE'S TAKING A RISK FOR,
IN THE ONE CASE PERHAPS,
THE FUTURE OF THE
COLONY, ONE MIGHT SAY,
CERTAINLY THE DANGERS OF
SLAVES RUNNING AMUCK ON LAND.
ON THE OTHER HAND,
HE RUNS THE RISK
OF LOSING THE CARGO,
LOSING THE SHIP,
AND I SUSPECT AS A RESULT
HE WOULD HAVE LOST HIS JOB
AND PROBABLY A GREAT
DEAL MORE, AS WELL.
SO IN THE END, WHAT
DOES HE DECIDE TO DO?
HE TAKES THE RISK.
HE'LL LIGHT THE FIRES.
Narrator: A WEEK AFTER
ARRIVING AT STRUTSBAAI,
THE SLAVES FINALLY SEE THE
SIGNAL THEY ARE WAITING FOR.
HA HA! MADAGASCAR! HA HA HA!
Narrator: THEY ARE
EAGER TO GET ASHORE.
THE WEATHER IS IN THEIR FAVOR.
HIGH WINDS AND CURRENTS PUSH THE
SHIP CLOSER AND CLOSER TO SHORE.
Muller: THE VESSEL DRIFTED
TOWARDS THE BEACH.
TO AVOID DISASTER, IT WAS
DECIDED TO BEACH THE SHIP.
IN STRONG SEAS, THE SHIP
WOULD HAVE BEEN SMASHED UP
AND NO SOULS WOULD
HAVE BEEN SAVED.
WHEN THE SHIP TOUCHED
GROUND, I GAVE THE ORDER
TO CUT THE MAINMAST.
Narrator: THE FIRST GROUP
OF SLAVES GOES ASHORE
IN THE ONE REMAINING ROWBOAT.
LE SUEUR POSITIONS
HIS HOMEGROWN MILITIA
OUT OF SIGHT BEHIND THE DUNES.
HE HAS ORDERS FROM CAPE
TOWN TO RECAPTURE THE SLAVES
BUT NOT HARM THEM,
BUT HE QUICKLY LOSES CONTROL
OF THE NERVOUS FARMERS.
Muller: THEY WERE ATTACKED
NEAR THE DUNES AND SHOT AT.
Narrator: FINALLY MASSAVANNA
AND HIS COUNTRY MEN REALIZE
THEY'VE BEEN DECEIVED.
[SPEAKING MALAGASY]
HA HA HA! MADAGASCAR!
[SPEAKS MALAGASY]
Narrator: THEY KNOW THEY
WILL NEVER RETURN HOME.
I THINK IT MUST HAVE BEEN
A MOMENT OF DISTRESS,
A MOMENT OF PAIN KNOWING
THAT THIS IS THE END,
THAT ''I'M GOING TO BE TAKEN.''
Narrator: 19 DAYS AFTER
TAKING OVER THE MEERMIN,
MASSAVANNA AND HIS COUNTRYMEN
GIVE UP THEIR STRUGGLE.
THEY ARE TAKEN TO
CAPE TOWN IMMEDIATELY.
THE MEERMIN IS LEFT BEHIND
TO SINK INTO THE OCEAN.
FURIOUS ABOUT THEIR
FINANCIAL LOSS,
THE VOC COURT OF JUSTICE
PUTS BOTH THE SLAVE LEADERS
AND THE SAILORS ON TRIAL.
THE VOC HAS A SEVERE PUNISHMENT
FOR ANY SLAVE WHO
ATTACKS HIS MASTER--
DEATH BY IMPALEMENT ON A STAKE.
[SCREAMING]
THE END OF THE TRIAL--
THIS RECORD THAT WE'VE
GOT OF ALL THE TRIAL,
YOU WOULD EXPECT THAT THE
RESULT OF THIS WOULD BE
THAT MASSAVANNA WOULD
RECEIVE THE MOST GRUESOME
KIND OF DEATH SENTENCE,
WHICH IS WHAT HAPPENED
TO SLAVES WHO REVOLTED
AGAINST THEIR OWNERS
OR AGAINST THE COMPANY,
AND YOU WOULD ALSO
EXPECT THAT MULLER,
WHO'S ALSO PUT ON
TRIAL FOR NEGLIGENCE,
WOULD PERHAPS HAVE GOT A MILD
PUNISHMENT OR A TICKING OFF,
BUT IT'S REALLY MASSAVANNA
WHO WOULD HAVE GOT
THE FULL FORCE OF THE LAW.
ABSOLUTELY THE OPPOSITE HAPPENS.
Narrator: GERRIT MULLER
IS STRIPPED OF HIS
CAPTAIN'S RANK AND WAGES
AND FORBIDDEN FROM
SERVING IN THE VOC
FOR THE REMAINDER OF HIS LIFE.
HE IS BANNED FROM THE CAPE
AND PUT ON THE FIRST SHIP
RETURNING TO AMSTERDAM,
ON WHICH HE MUST
WORK FOR HIS PASSAGE.
HE IS FINED ONE MONTH'S
WAGES AND ORDERED TO PAY
THE COSTS OF THE CASE.
AND DESPITE ALL
HIS EFFORTS, OLAF LEIJ IS
ALSO FIRED FROM THE VOC.
AS ASSISTANT CHIEF MERCHANT,
HE WAS EXPECTED TO HAVE
OBEYED COMPANY RULES.
Worden: ALL THROUGH THE
TRIAL, MASSAVANNA DENIES SOME
OF THE KEY THINGS THAT
HE'S BEEN ACCUSED OF.
I GET THE SENSE OF HIM
AS A VERY FORCEFUL MAN.
LOOK AT THESE ANSWERS HE GIVES
TO SOME OF THE QUESTIONS.
YOU KNOW, IT'S SORT OF,
''IS IT NOT THE CASE
''THAT YOU HAD
PLANNED TO DO THIS
AND TO ATTACK THE EUROPEANS?''
''NO!'' EXCLAMATION
MARK, YOU KNOW.
DEFIANT. HE'S FORCEFUL--
DEFIANT. EXACTLY.
IT'S NOT POSSIBLE
FOR THE COURT TO HAVE
ENOUGH DEFINITIVE EVIDENCE
TO BE ABLE TO EXECUTE HIM.
IT WAS VERY IMPORTANT
THAT YOU HAD SOMEBODY
WHO COULD PROVIDE
DEFINITIVE EVIDENCE
AGAINST SOMEONE IN A TRIAL,
WHO WERE HONORABLE
MEN, TRUSTWORTHY MEN.
THERE WEREN'T MANY OF THESE
AROUND IN THIS TRIAL,
SO REALLY THE COMPANY IS CAUGHT
IN ITS OWN LEGAL LAWS HERE.
THESE ARE ARE THE
WORDS THEY USE--
[SPEAKS LATIN]
THEY HAVEN'T GOT
DEFINITIVE ENOUGH EVIDENCE
IN ORDER TO BE ABLE TO PASS
A DEATH SENTENCE ON HIM,
AND INSTEAD THEY ARE GOING
TO PLACE HIM PROVISIONALLY--
THEY'RE GOING TO BAN
HIM TO ROBBEN ISLAND.
WHAT I THINK IS
PARTICULARLY MOVING
IS THAT HE SIGNS RIGHT
AT THE END HERE. THERE.
HE SIGNS WITH HIS
MARK, HIS CROSS.
HE MAKES THE SIGN OF THE CROSS.
THIS IS THE ONE MARK
IN THIS HUGE ARCHIVE
WHICH MASSAVANNA HIMSELF
LEFT DIRECTLY ON THE PAGE.
Narrator: MASSAVANNA'S
STORY DOESN'T END HERE.
NIGEL WORDEN HAS DISCOVERED
ONE MORE DOCUMENT
IN THE VAST VOC ARCHIVE.
SO THESE ARE THE REGISTERS
WHO WERE SENT TO
ROBBEN ISLAND,
AND AS YOU CAN SEE,
THIS IS IN 1 776,
SO JUST AFTER HIS TRIAL.
''MASSAVANNA FROM MADAGASCAR,
SENTENCE AT THE CAPE ON
THE 25th OF AUGUST,''
AND THERE HE IS.
IT SAYS--SEE HERE THE
PEOPLE WHO'D ARRIVED,
AND THERE'S MASSAVANNA TOGETHER
WITH KOESAAIJ,
THE TWO OF THEM.
WHAT TO ME IS THE MOVING PART,
IT GIVES THE DETAILS
OF EVERYBODY ELSE,
OF HOW LONG THEY'VE BEEN
SENTENCED FOR ON THE ISLAND--
5 YEARS, 15 YEARS--
BUT FOR MASSAVANNA
AND KOESAAIJ,
IT SAYS, ''PUT ON THE ISLAND
UNTIL FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS.''
SO THEY'RE DUMPED THERE
AT THE MERCY OF THE COURT
TO DECIDE HOW LONG
THEY'RE GONNA STAY THERE.
THERE'S NO TERMINATION TO THIS.
Massavanna: IN OUR COUNTRY
IF SOMEBODY KILLS A PERSON,
THE KING WILL FINE THE MURDERER.
I AM AN IMPRISONED
MAN AND ONLY A SLAVE,
AND YOU CAN DO WITH
ME WHAT YOU WANT.
Narrator: FOR CENTURIES,
ROBBEN ISLAND WAS USED
TO IMPRISON TROUBLESOME
REBEL LEADERS,
INCLUDING ITS MOST FAMOUS
RESIDENT NELSON MANDELA.
MASSAVANNA WAS IN GOOD COMPANY.
AND THEN 4 YEARS LATER,
WE GET THE NEWS HERE
THAT MASSAVANNA HAS DIED ON
THE 20th OF DECEMBER 1 769.
JUST OVER 3 YEARS HE
LIVED ON THE ISLAND
AND THEN DIED AS
A COMPANY SLAVE.
Narrator: ROBBEN ISLAND
WAS WHERE PEOPLE WERE
SENT TO BE FORGOTTEN,
BUT MASSAVANNA'S MEMORY AS
A FREEDOM FIGHTER LIVES ON.
IT DOES SHOW PEOPLE
THAT THE RESISTANCE
TO OPPRESSION IS
NOT A NEW THING.
IT'S PART OF HISTORY.
Narrator: IT'S WHAT
KEEPS BOSHOFF SEARCHING
FOR THE WRECK OF THE MEERMIN.
Boshoff: SOMEONE ASKED A FAMOUS
MOUNTAINEER AT ONE STAGE
''WHY DO YOU CLIMB MOUNTAINS?''
AND HE SAID, ''BECAUSE
IT'S THERE.''
AND I THINK IT'S
IN A SENSE SIMILAR.
I THINK THE WRECK IS
THERE. I NEED TO FIND IT.
Narrator: HE IS NOW READY
TO BEGIN THE NEXT PHASE
OF THE MEERMIN STORY,
TO FIND THE WRECK ITSELF.
AS FOR THE VOC, IT
WENT BANKRUPT IN 1 798
DUE TO RAMPANT CORRUPTION.
FOR LUCY CAMPBELL, MASSAVANNA'S
MUTINY WAS A TRIUMPH.
HE NEVER MADE IT HOME,
BUT HE DID DESTRO Y THE
SLAVE SHIP MEERMIN.
Campbell, voice-over:
THE FACT THAT THAT BOAT,
THE MEERMIN WILL NEVER,
EVER SAIL AGAIN FOR
ME IS A CELEBRATION,
THAT THEY WILL NEVER
CARRY HUMAN CARGO,
THAT THE MEERMIN IS A WRECK.
Narrator: MASSAVANNA'S
CO-LEADER KOESAAIJ SURVIVED
20 YEARS HERE.
BOTH MEN ARE BURIED
ON ROBBEN ISLAND.
Campbell: I WOULD LIKE IT
TO BE A LITTLE BIT EASIER,
BUT THERE ARE SO
MANY UNMARKED GRAVES.
IT COULD BE ANY ONE,
BUT FOR ME THE
MEMORY OF MASSAVANNA
WILL ALWAYS LIVE ON
BECAUSE I'VE GOTTEN
TO KNOW MASSAVANNA,
AND THIS MEMORY
I WILL CARRY OVER
FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION.
FOR ME, HE IS HERE SOMEWHERE,
AND FOR ME, HE'S AMONGST
THE HEROES OF ALL HEROES.
IT SAYS SOMETHING ABOUT
HUMAN BEINGS THERE THERE IS
SOMETHING IN US THAT REFUSES TO
BE REGARDED AS LESS THAN HUMAN.
[CHEERING]
WE ARE CREATED FOR FREEDOM.
THAT'S WHY SLAVERY IS
GOING TO FAIL ULTIMATELY.
THAT IS WHY INJUSTICE
FAILS ULTIMATELY,
OPPRESSION FAILS ULTIMATELY.
Narrator: MASSAVANNA WAS JUST
ONE OF TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF ENSLAVED PEOPLE WHOSE
LIVES WERE RECORDED
IN THIS VAST ARCHIVE,
AN UNLIKELY HERO WHO SIMPLY
WANTED TO RETURN HOME.
HE IS NOW REMEMBERED FOR
HIS FIGHT FOR FREEDOM.
''SECRETS OF THE DEAD''
WAS MADE POSSIBLE
BY CONTRIBUTIONS TO YOUR PBS
STATION FROM VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
THANK YOU.
THE ''SECRETS OF THE DEAD''
INVESTIGATION CONTINUES ONLINE.
FOR MORE IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS
AND STREAMING VIDEO
OF THIS AND OTHER
EPISODES, VISIT PBS.ORG.